ROM BANK TEST
=============
 
This test is used to check the basic
functionality of the FinalGROM 99.
 
This test will switch and run trough
all banks in a given order and report
any bad switches or runs.
 
If a given bank is activated by the
correct bank and the run through the
activated bank completes successfully,
the program displays its bank number
followed by "OK".
 
In case of a bank switch or run error,
only the bank number is displayed, and
an additional message at the bottom of
the screen, including the read word
and the expected word, is shown.  The
message remains on the screen until
another error ovewrites it.
 
The banks are switched in scrambled
but fixed order, so that each bank is
activated once.  The test checks at
the beginning of each bank, if the
previous bank number is correct.  Then
it runs through the entire bank and
checks the value of every ninth word
in that bank.  Because the check code
is spread out more, the likelyhood of
bad reads crashing the TI 99 might be
higher.
 
This test runs in a loop.  You may run
it unsupervised for prolonged periods
to see if the FinalGROM 99 runs
stably.  Upon return, the bottom of
the screen will tell you if there were
any errors.
 
(In case of crashes, note that it may
*still* have been the TI 99 that has
failed.)
